.. highlight:: shell

.. _installation:

============
Installation
============

Requirements
------------

1. pip
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

:code:`pip` is a Python package manager that makes it much easier to download and install Python packages,
as a part of such :code:`wbuild` and :code:`snakemake`. If you don't have `pip`_ installed, this `Python installation guide`_ can guide
you through the process.

.. _pip: https://pip.pypa.io
.. _Python installation guide: http://docs.python-guide.org/en/latest/starting/installation/

Advanced users who want to get the Python packages elsehow can skip this step.

2. snakemake
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Snakemake is essential to wBuild workflow (learn why in the :ref:`Overview of functionality <overview-of-functionality>`).
You can get Snakemake either using :bash:`pip` or building from `sources <https://bitbucket.org/snakemake/snakemake/>`_.

3. R and packages
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The original purpose of wBuild's work is to let you put additional build/dependencies info in your R scripts, so we suppose
`you have already installed R <https://www.r-project.org/>`_. Now, the very important step for installation is to install
various **R packages**:

* `knitr`
* `rmarkdown`
* `pandoc`

as Snakemake **inevitably uses them** while working with wBuild.

You can install packages for R with :code:`install.packages(packagename)` directive. Find out more
for instance `here <https://www.r-bloggers.com/installing-r-packages/>`_.

Additionally for *Windows* users
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You need to add :code:`R_HOME` and pandoc home variables to your Path for Snakemake CLI to run correctly.
See p.2 in `this instruction <http://www.endmemo.com/program/R/installr.php>`.

.. _install-wbuild:

Now, you are all ready and set up to install the ``wBuild` itself.

.. _project-structure:

wBuild project structure
------------------------

Assert :code:`ROOT` is the root directory of your project. Then

ROOT/.wBuild
    Is a directory with static wBuild files that *is not supposed to be changed unless necessary*. There are all the
    service files located

ROOT/wbuild.conf
    Is a configuration file. Deleting will disrupt the wBuild work! See :ref:`configuration file <configuration-file>`.

ROOT/.wBuild.depend
    File *autogenerated* by wBuild. Contains rule information for the :code:`snakemake workflow <overview-of-functionality>`.

ROOT/Scripts
    Is a directory where all your scripts should be located.

ROOT/Output
    Is a default output directory.

Stable release
--------------

Please make sure you've read `Requirements`_ first.

To install wBuild, run this command in your terminal:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pip install wbuild


From sources
------------

The sources for wBuild can be downloaded from the `Github repo`_.

You can either clone the public repository:

.. code-block:: console

    $ git clone git://github.com/wachutka/wbuild

Or download the `tarball`_:

.. code-block:: console

    $ curl  -OL https://github.com/wachutka/wbuild/tarball/master

Once you have a copy of the source, you can install it with:

.. code-block:: console

    $ python setup.py install


.. _Github repo: https://github.com/wachutka/wbuild
.. _tarball: https://github.com/wachutka/wbuild/tarball/master
